Today and in the recent future, to fulfill the presumptions and challenges of the near future, the wireless based networks of today will have to advance in various ways. Recent technology constituent like high-speed packet access (HSPA) and long-term evolution (LTE) will be launched as a segment of the advancement of current wireless based technologies. Nevertheless, auxiliary components may also constitute future new wireless based technologies, which may adjunct the evolved technologies. Specimen of these new technology components are different ways of accessing spectrum and considerably higher frequency ranges, the instigation of massive antenna configurations, direct device-to-device communication, and ultra-dense deployments [1].

Since its initiation in the late 1970s, mobile wireless communication has come across from analog voice calls to current modern technologies adept of providing high quality mobile broadband services with end-user data rates of several megabits per second over wide areas and tens, or even hundreds, of megabits per second locally. The extensive improvements in terms of potentiality of mobile communication networks, along with the initiation of new types of mobile devices such as smart phones and tablets, have produced an eruption of new applications which will be used in cases for mobile connectivity and a resultant exponential growth in network traffic. This paper presents our view on the future of wireless communication for 2020 and beyond. In this paper, we describe the key challenges that will be encountered by future wireless communication while enabling the networked society. Along with this, some technology routes that may be taken to fulfill these challenges [1].

The imagination of our future is a networked society with unbounded access to information and sharing of data which is accessible everywhere and every time for everyone and everything. To realize this imagination, new technology components need to be examined for the evolution of existing wireless based technologies. Present wireless based technologies, like the 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP) LTE technology, HSPA and Wi-Fi, will be incorporating new technology components that will be helping to meet the needs of the future. Nevertheless, there may be certain scenarios that cannot be adequately addressed along with the evolution of ongoing existing technologies. The instigation of completely new wireless based technologies will complement the current technologies which are needed for the long term realization of the networked society [2].

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: In Section II, we present the evolution of wireless technologies. Section III gives the detailed description of the proposed general 5G cellular network architecture. Section IV comprises of the detailed explanation of the emerging technologies for 5G wireless networks. We conclude our paper in Section V. A list of current research projects based on 5G technologies is shown in the appendix.

G. Marconi, an Italian inventor, unlocks the path of recent day wireless communications by communicating the letter ‘S’ along a distance of 3Km in the form of three dot Morse code with the help of electromagnetic waves. After this inception, wireless communications have become an important part of present day society. Since satellite communication, television and radio transmission has advanced to pervasive mobile telephone, wireless communications has transformed the style in which society runs. The evolution of wireless begins here [2] and is shown in Fig. 1. It shows the evolving generations of wireless technologies in terms of data rate, mobility, coverage and spectral efficiency. As the wireless technologies are growing, the data rate, mobility, coverage and spectral efficiency increases. It also shows that the 1G and 2G technologies use circuit switching while 2.5G and 3G uses both circuit and packet switching and the next generations from 3.5G to now i.e. 5G are using packet switching. Along with these factors, it also differentiate between licensed spectrum and unlicensed spectrum. All the evolving generations use the licensed spectrum while the WiFi, Bluetooth and WiMAX are using the unlicensed spectrum. An overview about the evolving wireless technologies is below:

A. 1G
The 1st generation was announced in initial 1980’s. It has a data rate up to 2.4kbps. Major subscribers were Advanced Mobile Phone System (AMPS), Nordic Mobile Telephone (NMT), and Total Access Communication System (TACS). It has a lot of disadvantages like below par capacity, reckless handoff, inferior voice associations, and with no security, since voice calls were stored and played in radio towers due to which vulnerability of these calls from unwanted eavesdropping by third party increases [7].

B. 2G
The 2nd generation was introduced in late 1990’s. Digital technology is used in 2nd generation mobile telephones. Global Systems for Mobile communications (GSM) was the first 2nd generation system, chiefly used for voice communication and having a data rate up to 64kbps. 2G mobile handset battery lasts longer because of the radio signals having low power. It also provides services like Short Message Service (SMS) and e-mail. Vital eminent technologies were GSM, Code Division Multiple Access (CDMA), and IS-95 [3], [7].

C. 2.5G
It generally subscribes a 2nd generation cellular system merged with General Packet Radio Services (GPRS) and other amenities doesn’t commonly endow in 2G or 1G networks. A 2.5G system generally uses 2G system frameworks, but it applies packet switching along with circuit switching. It can assist data rate up to 144kbps. The main 2.5G technologies were GPRS, Enhanced Data Rate for GSM Evolution (EDGE), and Code Division Multiple Access (CDMA) 2000 [3], [7].

D. 3G
The 3rd generation was established in late 2000. It imparts transmission rate up to 2Mbps. Third generation (3G) systems merge high speed mobile access to services based on Internet Protocol (IP). Aside from transmission rate, unconventional improvement was made for maintaining QoS. Additional amenities like global roaming and improved voice quality made 3G as a remarkable generation. The major disadvantage for 3G handsets is that, they require more power than most 2G models. Along with this 3G network plans are more expensive than 2G [3], [7]. Since 3G involves the introduction and utilization of Wideband Code Division Multiple Access (WCDMA), Universal Mobile Telecommunications Systems (UMTS) and Code Division Multiple Access (CDMA) 2000 technologies, the evolving technologies like High Speed Uplink/Downlink Packet Access (HSUPA/HSDPA) and Evolution-Data Optimized (EVDO) has made an intermediate wireless generation between 3G and 4G named as 3.5G with improved data rate of 5-30 Mbps [3].

E. 3.75G
Long-Term Evolution technology (LTE) and Fixed Worldwide Interoperability for Microwave Access (WIMAX) is the future of mobile data services. LTE and Fixed WIMAX has the potential to supplement the capacity of the network and provides a substantial number of users the facility to access a broad range of high speed services like on demand video, peer to peer file sharing and composite Web services. Along with this, a supplementary spectrum is accessible which accredit operators manage their network very compliantly and offers better coverage with improved performance for less cost [4]–[5][6][7].

F. 4G
4G is generally referred as the descendant of the 3G and 2G standards. 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP) is presently standardizing Long Term Evolution (LTE) Advanced as forthcoming 4G standard along with Mobile Worldwide Interoperability for Microwave Access (WIMAX). A 4G system improves the prevailing communication networks by imparting a complete and reliable solution based on IP. Amenities like voice, data and multimedia will be imparted to subscribers on every time and everywhere basis and at quite higher data rates as related to earlier generations. Applications that are being made to use a 4G network are Multimedia Messaging Service (MMS), Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB), and video chat, High Definition TV content and mobile TV [2], [4]–[5][6].

G. 5G
With an exponential increase in the demand of the users, 4G will now be easily replaced with 5G with an advanced access technology named Beam Division Multiple Access (BDMA) and Non- and quasi-orthogonal or Filter Bank multi carrier (FBMC) multiple access. The concept behind BDMA technique is explained by considering the case of the base station communicating with the mobile stations. In this communication, an orthogonal beam is allocated to each mobile station and BDMA technique will divide that antenna beam according to locations of the mobile stations for giving multiple accesses to the mobile stations, which correspondingly increase the capacity of the system [8]. An idea to shift towards 5G is based on current drifts, it is commonly assumed that 5G cellular networks must address six challenges that are not effectively addressed by 4G i.e. higher capacity, higher data rate, lower End to End latency, massive device connectivity, reduced cost and consistent Quality of Experience provisioning [22], [23]. These challenges are concisely shown in Fig. 2 along with some potential facilitators to address them. An overview of the challenges, facilitators, and corresponding design fundamentals for 5G is shown in Fig. 2 [20]. Recently introduced IEEE 802.11ac, 802.11ad and 802.11af standards are very helpful and act as a building blocks in the road towards 5G [9]–[10][11][12][13]. The technical comparison between these standards is shown in table 1 and the detailed comparison of wireless generations is shown in table 2.

SECTION III.5G Cellular Network Architecture
To contemplate 5G network in the market now, it is evident that the multiple access techniques in the network are almost at a still and requires sudden improvement. Current technologies like OFDMA will work at least for next 50 years. Moreover, there is no need to have a change in the wireless setup which had come about from 1G to 4G. Alternatively, there could be only the addition of an application or amelioration done at the fundamental network to please user requirements. This will provoke the package providers to drift for a 5G network as early as 4G is commercially set up [8]. To meet the demands of the user and to overcome the challenges that has been put forward in the 5G system, a drastic change in the strategy of designing the 5G wireless cellular architecture is needed. A general observation of the researchers has shown in [14] that most of the wireless users stay inside for approximately 80 percent of time and outside for approximately 20 percent of the time. In present wireless cellular architecture, for a mobile user to communicate whether inside or outside, an outside base station present in the middle of a cell helps in communication. So for inside users to communicate with the outside base station, the signals will have to travel through the walls of the indoors, and this will result in very high penetration loss, which correspondingly costs with reduced spectral efficiency, data rate, and energy efficiency of wireless communications. To overcome this challenge, a new idea or designing technique that has come in to existence for scheming the 5G cellular architecture is to distinct outside and inside setups [8]. With this designing technique, the penetration loss through the walls of the building will be slightly reduced. This idea will be supported with the help of massive MIMO technology [15], in which geographically dispersed array of antenna’s are deployed which have tens or hundreds of antenna units. Since present MIMO systems are using either two or four antennas, but the idea of massive MIMO systems has come up with the idea of utilizing the advantages of large array antenna elements in terms of huge capacity gains.

To build or construct a large massive MIMO network, firstly the outside base stations will be fitted with large antenna arrays and among them some are dispersed around the hexagonal cell and linked to the base station through optical fiber cables, aided with massive MIMO technologies. The mobile users present outside are usually fitted with a certain number of antenna units but with cooperation a large virtual antenna array can be constructed, which together with antenna arrays of base station form virtual massive MIMO links. Secondly, every building will be installed with large antenna arrays from outside, to communicate with outdoor base stations with the help of line of sight components. The wireless access points inside the building are connected with the large antenna arrays through cables for communicating with indoor users. This will significantly improves the energy efficiency, cell average throughput, data rate, and spectral efficiency of the cellular system but at the expense of increased infrastructure cost. With the introduction of such an architecture, the inside users will only have to connect or communicate with inside wireless access points while larger antenna arrays remained installed outside the buildings [8]. For indoor communication, certain technologies like WiFi, Small cell, ultra wideband, millimeter wave communications [16], and visible light communications [17] are useful for small range communications having large data rates. But technologies like millimeter wave and visible light communication are utilizing higher frequencies which are not conventionally used for cellular communications. But it is not an efficient idea to use these high frequency waves for outside and long distance applications because these waves will not infiltrate from dense materials efficiently and can easily be dispersed by rain droplets, gases, and flora. Though, millimeter waves and visible light communications technologies can enhance the transmission data rate for indoor setups because they have come up with large bandwidth. Along with the introduction of new spectrum, which is not being conventionally used for wireless communication, there is one more method to solve the spectrum shortage problem by improving the spectrum utilization of current radio spectra through cognitive radio (CR) networks [18].

Since the 5G cellular architecture is heterogeneous, so it must include macrocells, microcells, small cells, and relays. A mobile small cell concept is an integral part of 5G wireless cellular network and partially comprises of mobile relay and small cell concepts [19]. It is being introduced to put up high mobility users, which are inside the automobiles and high speed trains. Mobile small cells are positioned inside the moving automobiles to communicate with the users inside the automobile, while the massive MIMO unit consisting of large antenna arrays is placed outside the automobile to communicate with the outside base station. According to user’s opinion, a mobile small cell is realized as a regular base station and its allied users are all observed as a single unit to the base station which proves the above idea of splitting indoor and outdoor setups. Mobile small cell users [19] have a high data rate for data rate services with considerably reduced signaling overhead, as shown in [8]. As the 5G wireless cellular network architecture consists of only two logical layers: a radio network and a network cloud. Different types of components performing different functions are constituting the radio network. The network function virtualization (NFV) cloud consists of a User plane entity (UPE) and a Control plane entity (CPE) that perform higher layer functionalities related to the User and Control plane, respectively. Special network functionality as a service (XaaS) will provide service as per need, resource pooling is one of the examples. XaaS is the connection between a radio network and a network cloud [20].

The 5G cellular network architecture is explained in [8] and [20]. It has equal importance in terms of front end and backhaul network respectively. In this paper, a general 5G cellular network architecture has been proposed as shown in Fig. 3. It describes the interconnectivity among the different emerging technologies like Massive MIMO network, Cognitive Radio network, mobile and static small-cell networks. This proposed architecture also explains the role of network function virtualization (NFV) cloud in the 5G cellular network architecture. The concept of Device to Device (D2D) communication, small cell access points and Internet of things (IoT) has also been incorporated in this proposed 5G cellular network architecture. In general, this proposed 5G cellular network architecture may provide a good platform for future 5G standardization network.